## Fast Serialization in Rust

This post is a technical follow-up to [a previous post]() on the [Abomonation]() serialization library. The library is pretty simple (it is about 400 lines of Rust, including comments, examples, and some tests), but it does what I think are some pretty interesting things. Mostly, the interesting things are cute ways of working with Rust's borrowing behavior to provide zero copy deserialization for complex types containing owned memory. 

### Rust programs

Rust is commonly thought of as a "hard" language. Invariably this comes down to Rust's very demanding approach to **ownership** and **borrowing**.

Rust programs superficially look much like other programs in other languages. Here is an example where I define a new struct `Book`, a method for creating new books, and some suggestive code where I create and list a library of most excellent books. 

```rust
struct Book {
	title: String,
	author: String,
	pages: u64,
}

impl Book {
	// a method for creating new books!
	pub fn new(t: String, a: String, p: u64) -> Book {
		Book {
			title: t,
			author: a,
			pages: p,
		}
	}
}

main() {
	// create a place for our books
	let mut library = Vec::new();

	// add some books to our library
	library.push(Book::new(format!("The Dying Earth"), format!("Jack Vance"), 186));
	library.push(Book::new(format!("Hyperion"), format!("Dan Simmons"), 481));

	// report on our book collection
    for index in 0 .. library.len() {
    	println!("title: {}", library[index].title);
    }
}
```

This really doesn't look that bad does it? It probably looks superficially similar to the way you might do this in any other non-turtle orientied language.

My experience with Rust has been that it really can be quite simple when you are doing fairly simple things. Complexity gets added progressively, in the sense that as soon as you accidentally run afoul of ownership and borrowing you hit a wall and come to a complete stop. 

The good news is that though repeated forehead application the ownership and borrowing wall eventually collapses, and the other side is really magical.

### Ownership

Each instance of data in a Rust program has a unique owner. This owner can be a variable binding (like `library` in the example above) or it can be some other owned data. In the example above, the string `"The Dying Earth"` is owned by the `Book` instance it was used in, which is in turn owned by the `Vec<Book>`, which is in turn owned by `library`.

An instance's owner is what keeps the instance alive. It is perhaps more like a "sponsor" in that sense. Because each instance has exactly one owner, if the owner either goes away or decides it would no longer like to own the instance, the instance can no longer be reached and should be cleaned up. This discipline isn't unique to Rust. If you are familiar with C++'s `unique_ptr` smart pointer, it does something similar: when the pointer is destroyed or set to a new value, 

For example, at the end of our program `library` goes out of scope. It owned a `Vec<Book>` which should be cleaned up (memory released) once each of the `Book`s that it owns are cleaned up. Each `Book` owns two `String`s, which are themselves backed by memory that should be released.

### Movement

The owner of an instance can change. To maintain the "unique owner" property Rust transfers ownership whenever an object is assigned. This invalidates the previous binding of the instance (it has been "moved"). For example, if we create a `Book` and add it to our library, we are no longer able to access it through our previous binding. 

```rust
	// create a new book and add it to our library
	let book = Book::new(format!("Suldrun's Garden"), format!("Jack Vance"), 448);
	library.push(book);

	// error: use of moved value: `book.title`
	println!("{}", book.title);
```

Moving an instance only changes the owner, it does not cause the instance to get collected or re-allocated or anything weird like that. You don't write any code to deal with ownership changing, because nothing about the instance has actually changed; it's still the same data it was before.

Moving is serious business! If I hand a `Book` to you, you own it now. You can do all sorts of horrible things to it, from just looking at it to changing it (!!!) to just not giving it back to me. How do you know if you received ownership of a `Book`? Look at the type signature:

```rust
fn here_you_go(book: Book) {
	...
}
```

It says `Book` and all instances have unique owners so you just got to own a new `Book`. Instances are moved by default; if you don't indicate otherwise, ownership moves in each assignment and with arguments to method calls.

Wait, "otherwise"?

### Borrowing

Borrowing is what you do when you don't want ownership to change. For example, maybe I want to *show* you my library so that you can write down the names of my awesome books, but I don't want to give you ownership of the library because you'll probably nick my awesome books. 

```rust
fn browse(library: Vec<Book>) {
	let yoink = library.pop();
}
```

Also you'll probably forget to return my library to me. See how you just kept ownership of it up above?

Rust's answer to this is borrowing, which gives you access to the instance, but not ownership. There are two types of borrows, corresponding to shared read-only access and exclusive read-write access, using the sigils `&` and `&mut` respectively. The type of a shared borrow of a type `T` is `&T` and the type of an exclusive borrow of a type `T` is `&mut T`. Both types of borrows ensure that once you are finished the original owner still has a valid `T`, although in the case of a mutable borrow it might have changed.

A shared borrow is useful to present read-only access to data:

```rust
fn browse(library: &Vec<Book>) {
	// compile time error; jerk.
	let yoink = library.pop();
}

fn main() {
	let library = Vec::new();
	...
	example(&library);
}
```

An exclusive borrow is useful if you want to allow mutation, but still want to hold on to an object. For example, I may want to let you take a book home, but I don't want you to walk off with my bookcase. That sounds a bit silly, but memory management is actually a lot like that.


```rust
fn browse(library: &mut Vec<Book>) {
	// totally works; jerk.
	let yoink = library.pop();
}

fn main() {
	let library = Vec::new();
	...
	example(&mut library);

	// `library` is still valid, if possibly empty
	library.push(Book::new(...));
}
```

### Lifetimes