# Timely and Differential on WASM

Web assembly (WASM) is a neat way to represent programs that can be run in the browser.
Especially neat is that you can target WASM from Rust, rather than needing to write everything in Javascript.
It may be a bit surprising, but you can even compile dataflows [timely](https://github.com/TimelyDataflow/timely-dataflow) and [differential](https://github.com/TimelyDataflow/differential-dataflow) into WASM, and run them in the browser (with some limitations).
This post will be a quick walkthrough of how to do that!

I owe a great deal of credit to https://dzfrias.dev/blog/rust-wasm-minimal-setup/, which was where I ultimately found a recipe for doing all this without a lot of frameworks that I didn't understand.
Now there are just a few frameworks I don't understand, but it is concise at least.
I recommend a read there too, to learn more about WASM and Rust.

Also credit to [Oli Wessels](https://bsky.app/profile/oliwessels.bsky.social) who prompted the work, and who may have more interesting things to report about what it unlocks than my limited vision!

## Setting up a project

We'll need a new Rust project, which you can create with `cargo new` or however you like.
We'll want to make a project with a *library* output, so probably best to use `--lib` for the new project, but we'll have to fix things up anyhow.

Here is the `cargo.toml` I'm using:
```
[package]
name = "timely_wasm"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[lib]
crate-type = ["cdylib"]

[dependencies]
differential-dataflow = "0.15"
timely = "0.21"
wasm-bindgen = "0.2.84"
```
Note the `[lib]` section which has a new crate type.
Also there are several dependencies, both dataflow dependencies and also `wasm-bindgen` which is an important part of making this work.

## Writing a Differential Dataflow

We're going to build an example with differential dataflow, to make things maximally interesting.
You could do the same thing with just a timely dataflow program, by not using differential dataflow.

We are just going to take differential's `examples/hello.rs` example, which counts up some degree distributions of random graphs.
We'll have to change what it does a bit, as for example getting access to a random number generator may be off the table for WASM (based on my understanding).
In fact there are other limitations of WASM, and we'll call these out as we bump into them.

We will need a `lib.rs` file, and I'll explain the one that I arrived at in pieces to keep it more manageable.
It starts like this:
```rust
use timely::{WorkerConfig, worker::Worker};
use timely::communication::allocator::Thread;
use differential_dataflow::input::Input;
use differential_dataflow::operators::Count;

use wasm_bindgen::prelude::wasm_bindgen;
use wasm_bindgen::prelude::wasm_bindgen;

#[wasm_bindgen]
extern "C" {
    #[wasm_bindgen(js_namespace = console)]
    fn log(s: &str);
}
```

This is a bit of up-front boiler plate that pulls in some external references we'll need, and also establishes a link to `Console.log` that you might expect in Javascript; we'll use that instead of `println!()`.

The rest of `lib.rs` is a fairly straightforward differential program (relative to other differential programs).
This isn't the right moment to explain differential dataflow, but there will be some important things to call out.
The short version is that this program creates a collection of numbers, counts each of the numbers, and then counts the number of times each count occurs.
```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn timely() {

    // create a naked single-threaded worker.
    let mut worker = Worker::new(WorkerConfig::default(), Thread::default(), None);

    // directly build a dataflow.
    let (mut input, probe) = worker.dataflow(|scope| {

        // create edge input, count a few ways.
        let (input, data) = scope.new_collection();

        let probe =
        data.count()
            .map(|(_val, cnt)| cnt)
            .count()
            .inspect(|x| log(&format!("observed: {:?}", x)))
            .probe();

        (input, probe)
    });

    // manage inputs.
    input.advance_to(0);
    for i in 0 .. 10 {
        input.update(i, 1);
        input.advance_to(i + 1);
        input.flush();
        while probe.less_than(input.time()) {
            worker.step();
        }
    }
}
```

The main important point is this fragment:
```rust
    // create a naked single-threaded worker.
    let mut worker = Worker::new(WorkerConfig::default(), Thread::default(), None);

    // directly build a dataflow.
    let (mut input, probe) = worker.dataflow(|scope| {
        ...
    }
```
Unlike most examples of timely and differential, we are not going to have a runtime with multiple worker threads.
We are going to directly run timely on the current thread, which is a crucial part of running on WASM, which does not have threading support.
So, rather than spin up worker threads that then coordinate, we directly set up a dataflow in `worker`, and then directly pilot `worker` around.
We could yield after various steps, do stuff like that, but we'll have to do it manually in order to return control.

That's the whole of `lib.rs`!
At this point you should be able to run `wasm-pack`:
```
wasm-pack build --target web --out-dir web/dist
```
Of course, if you don't have `wasm-pack` you'll need to [install it](https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/installer/).

## Javascript

We'll need some Javascript to point our web page at.
This file is `web/index.js`.
Note that it lives in the `web/` subdirectory, which matches where `wasm-pack` puts its output.
Make sure to check the `"./dist/timely_wasm.js"` path to see the output, and if you used different names to correct them!
```javascript
import init, * as wasm from "./dist/timely_wasm.js";

await init();
wasm.timely();
```

## Web page

Here's `web/index.hmtl`
```html
<!doctype html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <title>Rust+Wasm+Timely Minimal Setup</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <script type="module" src="./index.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

You should now be able to serve up the page, for example using (among other options)
```
python3 -m http.server
```

Having done this, you can navigate to `http://localhost:8000` and you should see a blank page titled `Rust+Wasm+Timely Minimal Setup`.
You should be able to crack open the developer console, which depends on the browser you are using, but in Safari it shows you roughly this:

```
[Log] observed: ((1, 1), 0,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 1), 1, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 2), 1,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 2), 2, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 3), 2,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 3), 3, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 4), 3,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 4), 4, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 5), 4,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 5), 5, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 6), 5,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 6), 6, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 7), 6,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 7), 7, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 8), 7,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 8), 8, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 9), 8,  1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 9), 9, -1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
[Log] observed: ((1, 10), 9, 1) (timely_wasm.js, line 60)
```

That's everything!

## Conclusions

It's not all that hard to get timely and differential computations running in the browser!

It's less clear what you need to do with this right now, but here are some examples:

1.  I put together a small intermediate language for differential, "DDIR", that can take user-supplied dataflow prographs and install and run them.
    This is a bit like "Materialize lite", if "lite" means "with basically none of the functionality other than an interactive prompt".
2.  Materialize has a [`SUBSCRIBE`](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/subscribe/) command that ships timestamped updates to you, and is sufficient to pilot around a DD input.
    That combined with this would let you do last-mile incremental work in the browser, without needing to set up new dataflows on Materailize.
3.  [Vega-lite](https://vega.github.io/vega-lite/) is a high-level language for interactive graphics, and my sense is that a lot of it could be backed by something like DD.
    There are some iterative/recursive constructs in it, and .. no idea how they maintain those interactively, but DD could offer a hand if it's anything else.

But realistically, there are any number of interesting things one could do, totally unknown to me.
That's one of the neat things about making work available more broadly, is that folks with a better understanding than me can leap in and do things that make so much more sense to them.
I'm hopeful that we'll hear about some of these!