# A Toy Vectorized Interpreter

Let's build a toy vectorized interpreter!

This is meant to be a short post, of no great consequence, demonstrating how not-hard it can be to build a data-parallel interpreter that goes faster than compiled Rust.
This isn't going to be a great job, but it should be brief and I hope instructive!
Whether those instructions are good or not, ideally we'll hear from folks if they are not.

## Interpretation and Vectorization

The rules of interpretation are that the program, the descripion of what we want to do with our data, comes from the command line.
We don't know what it is when we compile *our* program, which will run the program the user supplies.
The timer starts when user presses enter, not once `rustc` has finished compiling some proc macro we produce.

The idea we'll use dates back at least as far as [APL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/APL_(programming_language)), from as far back as the 1960s.
Many other languages do the same sorts of things, mostly "array languages" in my (limited) experience.

Informally, rather than repeatedly do one thing to one piece of data, we'll repeatedly do the same thing to lots of data.
If we structure our framework well, the act of thinking about what to do will be amortized over doing all of the work, and won't cost much.
In fact, we'll have a dead simple interpreter loop that looks up strings by names and uses virtual calls to get to the relevant logic.

We are going to work with data that are either `Vec<i32>` or `Vec<u32>`.
That is, data whose type is not statically known to us, but which are lists of some common type.
We don't know which type they are because we don't know what program you'll type, and it could be you want to use `i32` or it could be you want `u32`.
We won't know until you run the program.

## The Framework

We'll model the data we have by a stack, each position of which is meant to contain a list of data.
We don't know which type of data, so we'll just use `Box<dyn Any>`, which means "could be any type; you'll have to check at runtime".
```rust
let mut stack: Vec<Box<dyn Any>> = Vec::default();
```

We'll want to act on this stack, but we can't commit to statically knowing what is going to happen.
Instead, we'll create a library of "operations", each of which will act on the stack as they see fit.
```rust
trait VecOp {
    fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>);
}
```
Our operations will just be identified by strings (what the user types).
Each string will map to its corresponding `Box<dyn VecOp>`.
Given a sequence of string names, we can invoke the sequence of `op.act(&mut stack);` commands to implement the program.

## The Operations

Let's start with a simple example: incrementing an `i32`.
We might write this as
```rust
struct Inc;
impl VecOp for Inc {
    fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
        let inputs = stack.pop().unwrap();
        let output = inputs.downcast::<Vec<i32>>()
                           .unwrap()
                           .iter()
                           .map(|x| x+1)
                           .collect::<Vec<i32>>();
        stack.push(Box::new(output));
    }
}
```
It's not a lot of code, but it has some important moments to call out.

Having popped a thing off the stack, the `downcast::<Vec<i32>>()` call says "I wonder if this is a `Vec<i32>`?".
This is the moment where we go from not being certain what we are looking at, which is important because we don't statically know, to having a very specific type in front of us.
The `Vec<i32>` we then have is something we can iterate through, increment, and form up into a new vector.
We can put that vector back onto the stack, having boxed it as `Box<dyn Any>` to conceal the specifics of its type.

Importantly, once we have that `Vec<i32>` then Rust and LLVM and anyone else who wants to help can go to town and make sure *this* method goes fast.
It is very likely, empirically if nothing else, that this will compile down to SIMD and move through a large-ish number of elements each clock cycle.
We'll see how fast in a moment.

### Other Operations

The bit above is fine, but it's boiler plate other than the `|x| x+1` bit, and where we say `i32`.
It's at moments like these that Rust's macro system can save us a lot of typing, by letting us stub out those load-bearing moments in a "declarative macro".
```rust
macro_rules! impl_unary { ($name:ident, $in:tt, $out:tt, $impl:tt) => {
    struct $name;
    impl VecOp for $name {
        #[allow(unused_braces)]
        fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
            let inputs = stack.pop().unwrap();
            let output = inputs.downcast::<Vec<$in>>()
                               .unwrap()
                               .iter()
                               .map($impl)
                               .collect::<Vec<$out>>();
            stack.push(Box::new());
        }
    }
} }
```
This lets us rewrite the above, as well as write some new operations, like so:
```rust
impl_unary!(Inc, i32, i32, { |x| x+1 });
impl_unary!(Neg, i32, i32, { |x| -x });
impl_unary!(Abs, i32, u32, { |x| x.abs() as u32 });
impl_unary!(Bak, u32, i32, { |x| *x as i32 });
```
These are not great operations, but they'll let us string together a non-trivial program.

### Binary Operations

The above operations are "unary": the go from one input to one output.
Many exciting operations are "binary" in that they combine multiple inputs.
We can accommodate them as well, just with a different macro.
```rust
macro_rules! impl_binary { ($name:ident, $in0:tt, $in1:tt, $out:tt, $impl:tt) => {
    struct $name;
    impl VecOp for $name {
        #[allow(unused_braces)]
        fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
            let inputs1 = stack.pop().unwrap();
            let inputs0 = stack.pop().unwrap();
            let iter0 = inputs0.downcast::<Vec<$in0>>().unwrap().iter();
            let iter1 = inputs1.downcast::<Vec<$in1>>().unwrap().iter();
            let output = iter0.zip(iter1).map($impl).collect::<Vec<$out>>();
            stack.push(Box::new(output));
        }
    }
} }
```
This enables operations like
```rust
impl_binary!(Sum, i32, i32, i32, { |(x, y)| x + y });
impl_binary!(Mul, i32, i32, i32, { |(x, y)| x * y });
```
### Stack Manipulation Operations

There's a problem that you may have noticed.
While unary functions preserve the size of the stack, binary functions decrease it.
How are we going to write programs that don't just bottom out with an empty stack?

In most stack languages you have various operators that manipulate the contents of the stack.
A common one is `dup`, which duplicates the topmost element of the stack.
It's not really a "unary" or "binary" function as we are thinking about them, but it's easy enough to write.
```rust
struct Dup;
impl VecOp for Dup {
    fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
        let inputs = stack.pop().unwrap();
        let inputs = inputs.downcast::<Vec<i32>>().unwrap();
        stack.push(inputs.clone());
        stack.push(inputs);
    }
}
```

## A Test Harness

Yeah that's it.
We need to write a `main` now somewhere, and run the thing.
```rust
fn main() {

    let mut ops = std::collections::BTreeMap::<&str, Box<dyn VecOp>>::default();

    ops.insert("neg", Box::new(Neg));
    ops.insert("inc", Box::new(Inc));
    ops.insert("abs", Box::new(Abs));
    ops.insert("bak", Box::new(Bak));
    ops.insert("sum", Box::new(Sum));
    ops.insert("mul", Box::new(Mul));
    ops.insert("dup", Box::new(Dup));

    let mut stack: Vec<Box<dyn Any>> = Vec::default();
    stack.push(Box::new((0i32 .. 1_000).collect::<Vec<_>>()));

    // Read the program in from command line arguments.
    let prog = std::env::args().skip(1).collect::<Vec<_>>();

    let timer = std::time::Instant::now();

    for _ in 0 .. 1_000_000 {
        for cmd in prog.iter() {
            ops.get(cmd.as_str()).unwrap().act(&mut stack);
        }
    }
    println!("timer: {:?}", timer.elapsed());

}
```

For benchmarking purposes, we'll do 1M iterations, across 1K elements each iteration.
Clearly, you might like a better language that could do more interesting things, but .. not today.

I'm going to use the following program:
```
neg inc inc inc neg abs bak dup sum
```
It .. negates, increments three times, negates again (like subtracting three), takes the absolute value, goes back to being a signed integer, duplicates itself, and then adds to itself (doubling).
Because it is in a loop, it will then do this a lot and generally make a mess of its data as far as I can reason.
There will be a lot of integer overflow, and that will be fine.

This is not a useful program.
It does bounce between types, and it does use a mix of operations.
It exists to tell us how quickly this sort of interpreter can run.

### Running the Harness

```
./vectorized neg inc inc inc neg abs bak dup sum
timer: 1.074297209s
```

It takes just over a second to run the above thing one billion times.
That's an average of just over a nanosecond for each time we run it.
There are nine operations, so they are each just over 100 picoseconds, when averaged.
And they are operations we didn't know when we compiled the harness.
You can go and add or remove some commands, and it should behave similarly.
Unless it crashes because you wrote a bad program.

## Interpretation vs Compilation

Interpretation can go pretty fast when you are doing the same operation across lots of data.
It can even go faster than compiled code, if you hold back the structural information about the operations applying independently to a lot of data.

Don't misunderstand this to mean compilation isn't helpful.
Here are a few things it does:
1.  It can statically verify the types involved.

    If you actually did try to change the program above, it probably crashed.
    That's a thing that the framework could have told you, if it had thought a bit harder about your program.
    The types aren't only useful for code generation, but for maintaining order in programs and programming.

2.  It can optimize the program.

    If you write the above "program" in Rust with similar loops in place, it will optimize it.
    Three increments in a row should just be one increment by three.
    Duplicating and summing can be a shift.
    Moreover, it can unroll some of our 1M loop iterations and fuse that work together.
    It actually went faster than the interpreted code, by about 10%.

There are probably other things, but .. I'm the wrong person to make the best case here.

One thing I do like is that the line blurs a bit, and even taking just a moment with the supplied stack program,
```
neg inc inc inc neg abs bak dup sum
```
we could *optimize* it.

For the same reason we have great latitude in finding the implementation of an operator through various virtual calls, we can afford to do a little work with the program to streamline the upcoming execution.
I'm not entirely sure what we do here, but you could imagine removing pairs `neg neg`, removing more complex fragments like `dup neg sum sum`.
There's the flexibility to swap in equivalent expressions, based on tools like [e-graphs](https://egraphs-good.github.io).

By taking a step back, moving from compilation to interpretation, we give ourselves more space to focus on program transformations.
No reason compiler writers should do this, but for me (and maybe you) who doesn't want to write a whole compiler, it's a relief to know that you don't need to in order to deploy high-performance optimized programs.

## Caveats

If you've written these interpreters before, you probably noticed some of the cheats.
There is no conditional control flow in the language above.
There are no errors above, other than program-halting errors.
The good news is that there are known patterns for dealing with these, and they get as complicated as you like.

"Warps" are how GPUs handle concurrent execution of programs with divergent logic.
Informally, the data are either tagged or partitioned by where they are in the control flow, and work only happens on the folks who are there for it.
Tagging is easy but you may look at lots of data you don't act on; partitioning costs data movement but increases the density of relevant data.

The `columnar` crate, and probably others, stores `Result<S, T>` data with `S` and `T` held apart, and has a constant-time operation to see if either type is absent.
You can use this for carrying errors around, e.g. `Result<i32, String>`, where it goes fast as long as there are no errors, and falls back when there are.
Maybe it even always goes fast, in the same way that partitioning helped GPUs above.

## The Code

In case you want to copy/paste it in.
It even runs in the [Rust playground](http://play.rust-lang.org/) if you hardwire the input.
```rust
use std::any::Any;

trait VecOp {
    fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>);
}

macro_rules! impl_unary { ($name:ident, $in:tt, $out:tt, $impl:tt) => {
    struct $name;
    impl VecOp for $name {
        #[allow(unused_braces)]
        fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
            let inputs0 = stack.pop().unwrap();
            stack.push(Box::new(inputs0.downcast::<Vec<$in>>().unwrap().iter().map($impl).collect::<Vec<$out>>()));
        }
    }
} }

impl_unary!(Neg, i32, i32, { |x| -x });
impl_unary!(Inc, i32, i32, { |x| x+1 });
impl_unary!(Abs, i32, u32, { |x| x.abs() as u32 });
impl_unary!(Bak, u32, i32, { |x| *x as i32 });

macro_rules! impl_binary { ($name:ident, $in0:tt, $in1:tt, $out:tt, $impl:tt) => {
    struct $name;
    impl VecOp for $name {
        #[allow(unused_braces)]
        fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
            let inputs1 = stack.pop().unwrap();
            let inputs0 = stack.pop().unwrap();
            stack.push(Box::new(inputs0.downcast::<Vec<$in0>>().unwrap().iter().zip(inputs1.downcast::<Vec<$in1>>().unwrap().iter()).map($impl).collect::<Vec<$out>>()));
        }
    }
} }

impl_binary!(Sum, i32, i32, i32, { |(x, y)| x + y });
impl_binary!(Mul, i32, i32, i32, { |(x, y)| x * y });

struct Dup;
impl VecOp for Dup {
    fn act(&self, stack: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Any>>) {
        let inputs = stack.pop().unwrap();
        let inputs = inputs.downcast::<Vec<i32>>().unwrap();
        stack.push(inputs.clone());
        stack.push(inputs);
    }
}

fn main() {

    let mut ops = std::collections::BTreeMap::<&str, Box<dyn VecOp>>::default();

    ops.insert("neg", Box::new(Neg));
    ops.insert("inc", Box::new(Inc));
    ops.insert("abs", Box::new(Abs));
    ops.insert("bak", Box::new(Bak));
    ops.insert("sum", Box::new(Sum));
    ops.insert("mul", Box::new(Mul));
    ops.insert("dup", Box::new(Dup));

    let mut stack: Vec<Box<dyn Any>> = Vec::default();
    stack.push(Box::new((0i32 .. 1_000).collect::<Vec<_>>()));

    // maybe: vec!["neg", "inc", "inc", "inc", "neg", "abs", "bak", "dup", "sum"];
    let prog = std::env::args().skip(1).collect::<Vec<_>>();

    let timer = std::time::Instant::now();

    for _ in 0 .. 1_000_000 {
        for cmd in prog.iter() {
            ops.get(cmd.as_str()).unwrap().act(&mut stack);
        }
    }
    println!("timer: {:?}", timer.elapsed());

}
```