# Directional Predicates in Datatoad

Datatoad is a Datalog engine with a few interesting properties.
The main one I've mentioned has been "worst-case optimal joins";
these help you get a head start on queries like "find triangles in a graph".
In this brief post, we'll show off another cool property: bi-directional predicates.

I'll use "many-directional" and "omni-directional" loosely, in ways that I think the communities may not.
They make a lot of sense here, and I'm more than happy to correct them for public use, but for this post do come with a fresh mind about their meanings.

## A worked example

First let's see a query that takes a bunch of time:
```
.note all pairs [0, 1000) x [0, 1000).
arc(x, y) :- :range(0, x, 1000), :range(0, y, 1000).

.note all directed triangles from arc.
tri(a, b, c) :- arc(a,b), arc(b,c), arc(c,a).
```

This fragment first creates some data, the one million directed edges on one thousand nodes.
The second part of the query, `tri`, computes all directed triangles from `arc`.
This takes a while, 117.44s on my laptop, mostly because there are one billion outputs.
```
.list
   1000000 arc  [forms: Identity, Permute-1-0]
1000000000 tri  [forms: Identity]
```
Don't worry about the `forms`; the numbers to the left are record counts.
One million for `arc`, and one billion for `tri`.

For .. no particular reason .. let's add an additional constraint.
We'll restrict the triangles we derive to those satisfying `a + b = c`.
```
.note directed triangles satisfying a + b = c.
tri(a, b, c) :- arc(a,b), arc(b,c), arc(c,a), :plus(a,b,c).
```
This produces fewer triangles, certainly.
But can it avoid first producing the triangles, and then filtering them?

The first query took 117.44s, the modified query takes 195.85ms.
That is milliseconds, not seconds.
The second query runs about 1000x faster.
It produces ~2000x fewer output facts, so this seems very possible, but how did it avoid looking at all of the triangles?

## Bi-directional predicates

The `:plus(a,b,c)` is a predicate, one which restricts triples `(a,b,c)` to those where `a + b = c`.
But how does this actually work?
Let's build up through three increasingly helpful ways this could work.
The third, and most helpful, way is how datatoad actually works with predicates.

1.  `:plus` could act as a **predicate**: presented with `(a,b,c)` it accepts or rejects.

    This option means that we need to first form candidates `(a,b,c)`, using the other atoms in the join.
    In our case, it would mean we need to first perform the join, and then discard results.
    Or at least get as far as considering each triple before rejecting them.

2.  `:plus` could act as a **function**: presented with `(a,b)` it produces the `c = a + b`.

    This is a more helpful framing, where rather than awaiting `c` and then accepting or rejecting, it can participate in the enumeration of `c`.
    In datatoad's worst-case optimal join framework, it can be part of a plan that extends terms `(a, b)` to `c`.
    However, that is the only term order that works for it.

3.  `:plus` could act as a **relation**: presented with any two of `{a,b,c}` it produces the third.

    This is the most helpful framing of the three.
    As a relation it can participate in the derivation of any term from the other two.
    This is especially helpful for this query, where facts added to `arc` present as each of the three sets of two terms, from which we must derive the third.

The third property distinguishes itself from the second by being able to move in more "directions" than the forward one.
This results in the name "bi-directionality", though there are more than just two directions involved.
I think the name derives from generalizing `input -> output` to also `output -> input`, but I think ultimately it's more about minimizing the `input`/`output` dichotomy.

### Limitations on bi-directionality

Each relation based on a function symbol has limits to what it can produce.

1. The `:plus` relation, `a + b = c`, takes any two terms to the third.
2. The `:times` relation, `a * b = c`, takes any two terms to the third, but it can also take `c` to a list of `(a,b)` (these are integers).
3. The `:range` relation, `a <= b < c`, takes `(c, a)` to a list of `b`, but can't do much else.

This non-uniformity leads us to some planning questions.
Relations that derive from data,  because of their finiteness, can enumerate any set of terms from any other set of terms; we might call them "omni-directional".
By contrast, our "many-directional" predicates need a bit more thought to ensure we don't plan to go from `a` to `b` to `c` using `:range`, for example.

The way this gets modeled, in datatoad and to my understanding elsewhere, is that each logic-backed relation can list, for each set of term positions, the other term positions it could then finitely enumerate.
This information unlocks options in the join planner, though there is still care to be had in relying on these relations, as "just how finite" they are is open for discussion.
Datatoad's worst-case optimal bounds derive from the cardinalities of the data-backed relations, and we aren't excused if we digress into finite-but-unbounded output from functions.

## How this connects to join plans

Recall our restricted triangle query,
```
tri(a, b, c) :- arc(a,b), arc(b,c), arc(c,a), :plus(a,b,c).
```

Datatoad produces a plan that is able to handle changes to any of the atoms in the query.
It starts each with a "delta atom" that contains new facts, and joins against the other atoms in the query.
If we write `d_ab`, `d_bc`, and `d_ca` to indicate new facts added to each of the three `arc` atoms, we would write the updates to `tri` as:
```
tri(a, b, c) += d_ab(a,b), arc(b,c), arc(c,a), :plus(a,b,c).
             += d_bc(b,c), arc(a,b), arc(c,a), :plus(a,b,c).
             += d_ca(c,a), arc(a,b), arc(b,c), :plus(a,b,c).
```
The `:plus` relation doesn't change, so we don't end up needing a plan for it.

Each of these additions are planned however we see fit, and we use worst-case optimal join infrastructure.
Let's focus just on `d_ab`, which is extended by the term `c` using a worst-case optimal join:
```
d_ab -> wcoj(c, [arc(b,c), arc(c,a), :plus(a,b,c)])
```
The `wcoj` method expands the initial set of terms by the term that is its first argument, using atoms that mention that term and the input terms.
To go from `(a,b)` to a list of `c` values, each atom is asked for a bound on the number of distinct values they might produce.
Each pair `(a,b)` is then serviced by the atom with the least count, which proposes `c` values that the other atoms then validate.
In our case, `:plus` will always propose at most one output, versus the thousand the `arc` atoms would propose in our worked example.

The many-directionality of `:plus` means it can play the same role in each of the three update rules.
Although a *function* would work when we start from `d_ab`, as it would go from `(a,b)` to `c = a + b`, the *relation* works for each of the three update rules.
Each change to `arcs` will fire all three rules, so the more general applicability of relations over functions (to say nothing of predicates) is strongly felt here.

## In the wild

You might be suspicious about the contrived framing of a triangle query with constraints whose inputs may experience changes for unexplained reasons.
And you would be right to, as I have no live example of this.
But I thought I would share the sixth rule from the GALEN workload:
```
q(a,b,c) :- q(a,y,z), q(z,x,c), r(y,x,b).
```
This is a triangle query on terms `{x, y, z}`, with data `(a, b, c)` dangling off of the arcs.
When a fact is derived, it updates `q` which then produces new facts in the first two atoms.
This is exactly a triangle query that updates itself.

It doesn't have a `x + y = z` constraint though.
We could add one.
```
q(a,b,c) :- q(a,y,z), q(z,x,c), r(y,x,b), :plus(x,y,z).
```
There.
Now it is real.
And, the additions to `q` hit exactly the cases that the function interpretation of `x + y = z` would miss.
Great work, many-directionality!

## Conclusions

The directionality of predicates *greatly* opens up their abilities in relational programming.

Most Datalog engines appear to treat predicates as *functions* rather than relations.
This limits their ability to inform derivation, and makes them a second-class participant in query evaluation.
Datatoad's treatment of predicates as relations, and their integration into worst-case optimal join planning, makes directional predicates first-class relations.

Languages like [CLP](https://www.swi-prolog.org/pldoc/man?section=clp) (constraint logic programming), [Mercury](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mercury_(programming_language)), and the [Kanren family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MiniKanren) all support directional predicates, and have for years.
They use different mechanisms, and datatoad brings yet another: the framework of worst-case optimal joins.
The combination of the former, expressive relational programming, with the performance engineering of the latter seems like an exciting new opportunity.
